So, hi.
In the previous course, we saw
examples of different data models and
talked about a few current
data management systems.
In this module,
we'll focus on data retrieval.
Data retrieval refers to
the way in which data desired
by a user is specified and
retrieved from a data store.
Note that in this course, we are using
the term data retrieval in two ways.
Assume that your data is stored in a data
store that follows a specific data model,
like for
example the relational data model.
By data retrieval, we will refer to, one,
the way you specify how to get
the desired data out of the system,
this is called the query
specification method, and two,
the internal processing that occurs within
the data management system to compute or
evaluate that specified retrieval request.
While query specification can apply to
small data stores or large data stores,
we'll keep an eye on the nature of
query evaluation when the data is big.
Further, we'll consider how
the query specification changes
when we deal with faster streaming data.
A query language is a language in which
a retrieval request is specified.
A query language is often called
declarative, which means it lets you
specify what you want to retrieve without
having to tell the system how to retrieve.
For example, you can say,
find all data from relation employee
where the salary is more than 50k.
Now, you don't have to write a program
which will tell the system to open a file,
skip the first 250 bytes,
then in a loop pick the next 1024 bytes,
probe into the 600th byte and
read an integer, and so forth.
Instead of writing such
a complicated procedure,
you just specify the data items that
you need and the system does the rest.
For example, SQL,
structured query language,
is the most used query language for
relational data.
Now, in contrast to a query language,
a database programming
language like Oracle's PL/SQL or
Postgres's PgSQL are high-level
procedural programming languages
that embed query operations.
We will look at some query
languages in detail and
show examples of database
programming languages.
The first query language
we'll look at is SQL,
which is the ubiquitous query
language when the data is structured,
but has been extended in many ways
to accommodate other types of data.
For this course, we'll stick to
the structured aspect of the language.
Now, you should know that SQL is used for
classical database management systems
like Oracle as well as modern Hadoop
style distributed systems such as Spark.
Now, we will work with
an illustrative example.
First, we need to define
the schema of the database.
Now, think of a business called the
Beer Drinkers Club that owns many bars,
and each bar sells beer.
Our schema for
this business has six relations of tables.
The first table lists these bars,
the names, addresses, and
the license number of the bar.
Notice that the attribute name is
underlined because it is the primary key
of the bars relation.
Recall that the primary key
refers to a set of attributes,
in this case just the name,
that makes a record unique.
Note that the relation bars
with the attribute name
within parenthesis is the same
as the table shown on the right.
We will use both representations
as we go forward.
The second table called Beers, this is
the names and manufacturers of beer.
Now, not every bar sells the same
brands of beer, and even when they do,
they may have different prices for
the same product because of differences
in the establishment costs.
So the Sells table records which
bar sells which beer at what price.
Now, our business is special.
It also keeps information about
the regular member customers.
So the Drinkers relation has the name,
address, and phone of these customers.
Well, not only that,
it knows which member visits
which bars and
which beer each member likes.
Clearly, the Beer Drinkers Club
knows its customers.
The most basic structure of an SQL
query is a SELECT-FROM-WHERE clause.
In this example, we're looking for
beer names that are made by Heineken.
So we need to specify
our output attribute,
in this case the name of the beer.
The logical table which will be used to
answer the query, in this case, Beers.
And the condition that all the desired
data items should satisfy,
namely, the value of the attribute
called manf is Heineken.
Now, there are few things to notice here.
First, the literal Heineken
is put within quotes,
because it's a single string literal.
Remember that in this case,
the string is supposed to match exactly,
including the case.
Secondly, if you go back to the data
operations discussed in course two,
you will recognize that this form
of query can also be represented
as a selection operation on the relation
Beers with a condition on the manf
attribute, followed by
a projection operation
that outputs the name attribute from
the result of the selection operation.
So the selection operation finds all
tuples of beer for which the manufacturer
is Heineken, and from those tuples
it projects only the name column.
The result of the query is a table
with one single attribute called name.
We illustrate some more features of SQL,
using two example queries.
The first looks for
expensive beer and its price.
Let's say we consider a beer to be
expensive if it costs more than $15
per bottle.
From the schema,
we know that the price information is
available in the table called Sells.
So the FROM clause should use Sells.
The WHERE clause is intuitive and
specifies the price of the beer
to be greater than 15.
Now notice that the Sells relation
also has a column called bar.
Now, if two different bars sell
the same beer at the same price,
we'll get both entries in the result.
But that's not what we want.
Now regardless of the multiplicity
of bars that have the same price for
the same beer,
we want the result just once.
So this is achieved through
the SELECT DISTINCT statement,
which ensures that the result
relation will have no duplicate.
The second example shows the case
where more than one condition
must be specified by the result.
In this query,
the business must be in San Diego and
at the same time it must be
a temporary license holder,
which means the license
number should start with 32.
As we see here, these conditions
are put together by the AND operator.
Thus, the query will pick
the third record in the table
because the first record satisfy the first
condition and not the second condition.
In a few slides, we'll come back to
the evaluation of this type of queries
in the context of big data.
Now, remember, one can also place a limit
on the number of results to return.
If our database is large, and
we need only five results, for
example, for a sample to display,
we can say LIMIT 5.
Now, the exact syntax of this LIMIT
clause may vary between DBMS vendors.